REVIEW
published: 23 April 2018
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00232

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase
Polymorphisms: Genetic and
Biochemical Approaches for Study of
Endogenous N,N,-
dimethyltryptamine

Jon G. Dean*

Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Center for Consciousness Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States

N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) is a powerful serotonergic psychedelic whose exogenous
administration elicits striking psychedelic effects in humans. Studies have identiﬁed
DMT and analogous compounds (e.g., 5-hydroxy-DMT, 5-methoxy-DMT) alongside
of an enzyme capable of synthesizing DMT endogenously from tryptamine,
indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase (INMT), in human and several other mammalian
tissues. Subsequently, multiple hypotheses for the physiological role of endogenous
DMT have emerged, from proposed immunomodulatory functions to an emphasis on the
overlap between the mental states generated by exogenous DMT and naturally occurring
altered states of consciousness; e.g., schizophrenia. However, no clear relationship
between endogenous DMT and naturally occurring altered states of consciousness
has yet been established from in vivo assays of DMT in bodily ﬂuids. The advent of
genetic screening has afforded the capability to link alterations in the sequence of
speciﬁc genes to behavioral and molecular phenotypes via expression of identiﬁed single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in cell and animal models. As SNPs in INMT may
impact endogenous DMT synthesis and levels via changes in INMT expression and/or
INMT structure and function, these combined genetic and biochemical approaches
circumvent the limitations of assaying DMT in bodily ﬂuids and may augment data from
prior in vitro and in vivo work. Therefore, all reported SNPs in INMT were amassed from
genetic and biochemical literature and genomic databases to consolidate a blueprint for
future studies aimed at elucidating whether DMT plays a physiological role.

Keywords:
polymorphisms, psychedelics

indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase (INMT), N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT), consciousness,

INTRODUCTION

the presence of

The signiﬁcance of
the powerful psychedelic and serotonergic agonist
N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and similar psychedelic compounds in mammalian, including
human, bodily ﬂuids remains as unclear as it did when the ﬁrst such reports surfaced in
the 1950s and 60s (Bumpus and Page, 1955; Rodnight, 1956; Franzen and Gross, 1965;
Barker et al., 2012). Axelrod (1961) reported an enzyme in rabbit lung that methylated
tryptamine to DMT, suggestive of a biological purpose for this pathway and its product.

Edited by:
Andrew Robert Gallimore,
Okinawa Institute of Science and
Technology, Japan

Reviewed by:
Charles D. Nichols,
LSU Health Sciences Center
New Orleans, United States
Santiago J. Ballaz,
Yachay Tech University, Ecuador

*Correspondence:
Jon G. Dean
jgdean@umich.edu

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neuropharmacology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience

Received: 11 December 2017
Accepted: 23 March 2018
Published: 23 April 2018

Citation:
Dean JG (2018)
Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase
Polymorphisms: Genetic and
Biochemical Approaches for Study of
Endogenous N,N,-dimethyltryptamine.
Front. Neurosci. 12:232.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00232

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

Human and rat brain homogenates incubated with serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) and N-methyltryptamine were
subsequently shown to produce the corresponding dimethylated
products (Mandell and Morgan, 1971; Saavedra et al., 1973).
The
enzyme was named indolethylamine-N-
methyltransferase (INMT) and has been shown to catalyze the
N-methylation of a variety of indole compounds via the methyl
donor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet).

responsible

and

1998)

rabbit

cloning of

The ﬁnding of INMT mRNA in rabbit lung and brain
(Thompson and
coincided with the
Weinshilboum,
subsequently human INMT
(Thompson et al., 1999). This aﬀorded employment of a
battery of modern biochemical assays on puriﬁed rabbit and
human INMT proteins (referred to hereafter as rINMT and
hINMT) that measured the enzyme’s activity for methylation
of tryptamine and related compounds. Endogenous DMT has
since been conﬁrmed in several tissues in humans, rats, and
rabbits, including lung and brain (Kärkkäinen et al., 2005).
The biosynthesis of DMT ﬁrst requires decarboxylation of
dietary tryptophan via aromatic-L-amino acid decarboxylase
(AADC) to produce tryptamine, which then undergoes double
transmethylation reactions catalyzed by INMT (Figure 1). INMT
mRNA has been found in several human and rabbit peripheral
tissues (Thompson and Weinshilboum, 1998; Thompson et al.,
1999), and INMT protein is expressed in the Rhesus macaque
pineal gland (Cozzi et al., 2011). An in vivo study has further
demonstrated the presence of DMT in the dialysate sampled
from the pineal gland and visual cortex of freely-moving rats
(Barker et al., 2013).

DMT displays aﬃnity for several serotonin and other
neurotransmitter receptors (Ray, 2010; Nichols, 2016), exhibits
substrate behavior at plasma membrane serotonin transporters
in human platelets and rat vesicular monoamine transporters
(Cozzi et al., 2009), and accumulates in vesicular fractions
following exogenous administration to rats (Barker et al., 1984).
Moreover, DMT reportedly crosses the blood brain barrier
(Takahashi et al., 1985; Yanai et al., 1986) via active transport.
Collectively, these data suggest that DMT may be actively
synthesized and released in mammalian tissues, and stored in or
transported to the mammalian brain.

Exogenous administration—intravenously, via inhalation, or
orally in combination with a monoamine oxidase (MAO)
inhibitor—of a pharmacologically active dose of DMT elicits
profound alterations in consciousness characterized by visual
and other perceptual eﬀects, extreme emotional responses such
as euphoria or paranoid ideation, and internally-generated and
interactive visual landscapes, accompanied by a sense that the
“reality” of what is being perceived is more vivid than dreams
or waking reality (Strassman et al., 1994; Gouzoulis-Mayfrank
et al., 2005). This, coupled to DMT’s close structural similarity
to melatonin and serotonin (see Figure 1), has led to several
hypotheses of elevated levels of endogenous DMT being involved
in naturally occurring altered states of consciousness such as
dreaming, religious experience, the near-death state, psychosis,
and creativity.

One approach to understanding the possible role of an
endogenous hallucinogen was the transmethylation hypothesis

(Osmond and Smythies, 1952). Osmond and Smythies (1952)
hypothesized that schizophrenia may involve aberrant adrenal
metabolism leading to methylation of
stress compounds
such as adrenaline to form mescaline-like compounds with
psychedelic properties that contribute to the clinical symptoms of
schizophrenia. This hypothesis has been extended to encompass
the possibility of similar altered functioning of DMT enzymatic
pathways (see Figure 1) leading to elevated levels of
the
dimethylated tryptamines (DMTs); e.g., DMT and analog
psychoactive compounds such as 5-hydroxy-DMT (5-HO-DMT
[bufotenine]) and 5-methoxy-DMT (5-MeO-DMT), in the bodily
ﬂuids of schizophrenics (Barker et al., 1981; Grammenos and
Barker, 2015). Evolving analytical chemistry-based techniques,
from thin layer chromatography to liquid chromatography
combined with high resolution mass spectrometry, have been
used to compare DMT concentrations in bodily ﬂuids (e.g.,
blood, urine, cerebrospinal ﬂuid) of psychiatric patients vs.
healthy controls. Some of these studies reported a correlation
between elevated DMT levels and psychosis, but when considered
collectively, ultimately failed to support this hypothesis (Gillin
et al., 1976; for a thorough review of all such studies from 1955
to 2010, see Barker et al., 2012). Moreover, upon extrapolation
of the concentrations of DMT reported in mammalian bodily
ﬂuids and whole tissues to what has been demonstrated via
in vitro binding assays, it has been hypothesized endogenous
DMT concentrations cannot functionally activate brain receptors
for psychedelic eﬀects (Nichols, 2018). This
shown critical
hypothesis is partly based, however, on concentrations observed
from exogenous administration and levels observed in the
periphery, without consideration for the possibility of direct
synthesis and cellular concentration mechanisms for DMT in the
brain. Nonetheless, accurate quantitation of DMT concentrations
in bodily ﬂuids has been further plagued by its rapid breakdown
via MAO (Riba et al., 2015). The ﬁrst half of this review will focus
on summarizing this literature.

These studies demonstrate that research approaches that
circumvent the limitations of direct detection of endogenous
DMT altogether are needed. Monitoring changes in the activity
or a more thorough understanding of the biochemistry of the
enzymes involved in DMT synthesis may oﬀer such a solution.
One such approach is assessment of INMT activity for synthesis
of DMT in association with variation in the INMT gene. Variation
in the nucleotide sequence of a gene occurs frequently in
human populations, and a single individual may have multiple
nucleotides that diﬀer from a consensus reference sequence of the
gene. These variants are termed single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) when they occur at a single nucleotide and at a notable
frequency in a population. Though SNPs do not always manifest
at a phenotypic level, they often impact mRNA expression or
protein structure via a change in the coding region of a gene,
which leads to a change in cellular or behavioral phenotype
or even a disease state. Thus, whether or not a SNP has a
phenotypic impact relates to the aspect of gene structure that
it disrupts. When present in coding regions of the gene, SNPs
can either result in (1) no change in the amino acid residue in
which it occurs in the translated protein, a synonymous SNP,
although such a SNP may alter translational or folding events;

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

2

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

FIGURE 1 | Enzymatic pathways involved in the synthesis of the endogenous DMTs. Dietary tryptophan is the precursor for synthesis of serotonin (5-HT), melatonin,
DMT, and 5-HO-DMT (bufotenine). DMT is synthesized via decarboxylation of tryptophan by AADC to produce tryptamine which is then double-methylated utilizing
AdoMet as a methyl donor (rightmost pathway). Tryptophan can also be converted to 5-HT via hydroxylation by tryptophan hydroxylase and decarboxylation by
AADC (leftmost pathway). 5-HT can be converted to melatonin via addition of an acetyl group by N-acetyl transferase and methylation by 5-hydroxyindole-O-
methyltransferase, or can alternatively be converted to bufotenine via methylation by INMT. Polymorphisms in these enzymes, the receptors their products bind to
(e.g., 5-HT2A), and/or the metabolic enzymes that degrade their products (e.g., MAO) could affect the levels and effects of the endogenous DMTs through multiple
permutations of SNPs as discussed throughout the manuscript.

(2) a change in an amino acid residue, a nonsynonymous missense
SNP; or (3) the generation of a stop codon in the transcribed
mRNA, a nonsynonymous nonsense SNP, that often results in
a truncated, nonfunctional protein. Additionally, insertions and
deletions (indels) of nucleotides can alter the reading frame and
subsequently the coding of amino acids that follow its occurrence,
often leading to completely nonfunctional protein products being
translated. SNPs in non-coding regions can also aﬀect mRNA
structure and impact the expression of the gene and the protein it
codes through altering the splicing of a gene or binding to DNA

of other proteins which regulate expression. The range of impacts
a SNP may have can in part be predicted by assessing the SNP’s
location, the amino acid it changes, or the region it disrupts. This
in turn can allow prediction of the level of impact on protein
function and expression with relation to a phenotype of interest.
The assessment of SNPs at the single gene and population
level is a central tool of genetic studies which have shed light
on the biological nature of many disease states. A well-studied
example of a disease where a single nucleotide variant in a
single gene is responsible is sickle-cell anemia, which results from

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

3

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

being homozygous for a SNP (nucleotide A–T) in codon 6 of
the beta-globin gene. This leads to a change from the reference
amino acid residue glutamic acid (E/Glu) to valine (V/Val)
(Ingram, 1959). This elicits aggregation of a sickling hemoglobin
in red blood cells in low oxygen environments (Frenette and
Atweh, 2007). While the simple Mendelian inheritance pattern
of this and other diseases allows for the identiﬁcation of a
single responsible mutation through genetic screens, such as
genome wide association studies (GWAS), it is more often the
case that mutations in multiple genes associate with complex
phenotypes; e.g., bipolar disorder (Serretti and Mandelli, 2008),
with each of their individual contributions varying. Coupling
such genetic approaches with molecular studies provides a
framework to investigate the impact of genomic
powerful
variation. The potential impact of SNPs in the INMT coding
region on its enzymatic function, for instance, can be assessed
in vitro via biochemical assays incubating INMT protein variants
with INMT substrates including tryptamine.

As INMT is critical for catalyzing DMT, it can by hypothesized
that SNPs leading to diﬀerences in the function or levels of
INMT may be involved in the manifestation of behavioral
phenotypes sharing features with the mental states generated
by exogenous DMT. Moreover, identiﬁcation of INMT SNPs in
genetic studies not related to psychiatry may also shed light on
a non-psychoactive role for endogenous DMT, and such studies
will be discussed in the review that follows. Although a number of
SNPs in INMT have been cataloged, few studies have investigated
their occurrence with regard to endogenous DMT synthesis.
Therefore, the central goal of this review is to consolidate what
is known regarding SNPs in INMT to provide a blueprint for
future studies on the endogenous DMTs with speciﬁc regard to
INMT structure and function relationships. This is the focus of
the second half of the manuscript, accomplished through review
of current genetic and biochemical literature and databases on
INMT.

ENDOGENOUS DMT AND THE
TRANSMETHYLATION HYPOTHESIS

The fact that the subjective eﬀects of exogenous doses of
DMT sometimes parallel the positive symptoms of psychosis
in schizophrenics—e.g., hyperactivity, delusional
thoughts,
paranoid ideation, and auditory hallucinations—led to extension
of the transmethylation hypothesis to include DMT and INMT
(Barker et al., 1981; Cakic et al., 2010; Grammenos and Barker,
2015). Additionally, stress has been shown to both increase DMT
levels in rodents (Christian et al., 1977) and exacerbate the
positive symptomology of schizophrenia (Lataster et al., 2013).
Elevated INMT levels have also been reported in schizophrenics
vs. healthy controls (Wyatt et al., 1973a,b).

Thus, there have been attempts by researchers to quantify
DMT levels in the bodily ﬂuids of psychiatric populations vs.
healthy controls, originally in an eﬀort to develop new drug
treatments for schizophrenia that targeted inhibition of INMT.
Several of these studies have reported elevated levels of DMT,
5-HO-DMT, and 5-MeO-DMT in the blood, plasma, urine

and cerebrospinal ﬂuid of schizophrenics vs. healthy controls
(Emanuele et al., 2010; Barker et al., 2012). Many of the studies
assessing the DMTs in the bodily ﬂuids of psychiatric patients
suﬀered from antiquated analytical techniques and/or low sample
sizes. In the largest review of this literature taking into account
all such studies to date, Barker et al. (2012) concluded there was
no deﬁnitive trend of elevated levels of the DMTs in association
with psychosis. Since <1% of the parenteral dose of orally
administered DMT is recovered as DMT itself in the urine of
volunteers due to its rapid break down by liver MAOs (Riba
et al., 2015), it has been suggested that analysis of other DMT
metabolites in mammalian bodily ﬂuids is an approach that may
prove fruitful (Barker et al., 1981).

Disruption of

large-scale cortical

synchronization is a
correlate of schizophrenia (Uhlhaas and Singer, 2006), and
5-MeO-DMT was found to alter both the ﬁring pattern of
rodent medial prefrontal cortex pyramidal neurons as well as
decrease cortically generated slow oscillations that underlie the
synchronization of global cortical networks. The latter eﬀect
was subsequently reversed by the antipsychotic medications
clozapine and haloperidol (Riga et al., 2014). Moreover, 5-MeO-
DMT is more potent than DMT (McKenna and Towers, 1984;
Ott, 1999; Ray, 2010), suggesting endogenous 5-MeO-DMT may
be a candidate of focus for future studies aimed at assessing
the transmethylation hypothesis. Although the pathway for the
biosynthesis of 5-MeO-DMT is not completely clear, INMT
has been shown to methylate 5-MeO-tryptamine (Mandel and
Walker, 1974). GWAS studies on schizophrenia, however, have
yet to identify INMT.

Experimental data to date suggest that peripheral endogenous
DMT levels are extremely low, and it has been suggested that
plasma DMT levels following administration of an exogenous
psychedelic dose of DMT are incompatible with what the brain is
capable of synthesizing (Nichols, 2018). DMT has been identiﬁed
in the pineal gland (Barker et al., 2013) of living rats via
microdialysis and INMT has also been found in mammalian
pineal tissues (Cozzi et al., 2011). But there is not, to date,
data quantitating DMT’s levels therein or within the brains of
any other species via such contemporary analytical techniques.
Similarly, studies investigating the possible regional biosynthesis
of DMT in the brain are lacking as is research into the possible
inﬂuence of other physiological factors that could alter its rate
of synthesis. It is also inappropriate to assume that the pineal
is the sole source of DMT production in the brain. Although it
is true that INMT has yet to be reported outside of the pineal
gland in mammalian brain, the Northern blot assay employed
by Thompson et al. (1999) is not as sensitive as application of
INMT antibodies or INMT in situ hybridization probes to ﬁxed
brain tissues, which may reveal potential cortical or subcortical
distributions of INMT protein and INMT mRNA.

5-HT2A receptor

agonism by psychedelics

including
DMT has shown to be critical for their psychedelic eﬀects
(Vollenweider et al., 1998; Valle et al., 2016), and EC50-values
reported for DMT at 5-HT2A receptors are greater than what
may be extrapolated from reported peripheral DMT levels
in blood (Nichols, 2018). But peripheral levels of DMT may
or may not be reﬂective of brain concentrations, and such

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

4

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

samples are from bodily ﬂuids removed from theoretical cellular
sources of DMT and thus are further diluted or metabolized.
Plasma DMT concentrations observed following administration
of a psychedelic dose of DMT may also not mirror synaptic
DMT concentrations. For instance, the average concentration
of serotonin in brain tissues is in the micromolar range, but
synaptic concentrations can reach the millimolar range (Bruns
et al., 2000). Moreover, these pharmacological assays that assess
DMT activation thresholds at its receptors come with several
caveats, the most salient being the shortcomings of removing
a receptor from its native environment for subsequent testing.
These assays overexpress the protein in a variety of cell culture
systems: e.g., HEK-293 cells, human kidney cells which only
express 5-HT2A endogenously at low levels; Sf9 insect cells,
which do not process proteins or mimic mammalian G-protein
coupled receptor signaling pathways; and COS-1 cells, derived
from monkey kidney. Overexpression of receptors in these cell
systems often leads to artifacts. All are also likely highly mutated
from several generations of culturing. This may distance the
model from how the receptor functions in vivo. However, these
are invaluable model systems that allow for control of variables
in a manner not possible in intact animals and are intended to be
for comparative studies.

Reports of DMT aﬃnity at 5-HT2A have also varied
signiﬁcantly. One study monitoring the formation of [3H]-
inositol monophosphate formation in ﬁbroblasts expressing 5-
HT receptors reported an EC50 of DMT at 5-HT2A to be
983 nM (Smith et al., 1998), while others found this value to
be nearly 9-fold lower at 118 nM (Keiser et al., 2009) and 25-
fold lower at 38 nM (Blough et al., 2014) via monitoring of
calcium response in HEK-293 cells stably expressing 5-HT2A
receptors. Here, inter-experimental ratios may be more reliable
across several experiments; e.g., DMT’s aﬃnity at 5-HT2A vs.
5-HT2C receptors (Smith et al., 1998 observed 983 vs. 49 nM,
respectively), than between studies.

Thus, although it is reasonable to suggest that the low
amounts of DMT found in peripheral tissues may not occasion
a psychedelic response at 5-HT2A and other 5-HT receptors,
the ability of DMT to do so, cannot be ruled out based on
the current body of literature. As will be discussed, SNPs in
INMT may alter the endogenous concentrations of DMT, and
research on what such concentrations are in vivo the intact
living mammalian brain where such events occur is needed. With
regard to the former, most in vitro assays of DMT pharmacology
have been conducted on the reference genetic sequences for
serotonin receptors, and as such, the currently reported range
should not dictate a cutoﬀ EC50-value. One study assayed
mutant variants of 5-HT2A and found that non-synonymous
SNPs in the coding region of the 5-HT2A receptor increased
the potency of tryptamine and decreased that of 5-MeO-DMT,
and also increased the aﬃnity and functional eﬀects of several
antipsychotic agents in vitro (Davies et al., 2006). The authors
further concluded that even SNPs predicted to have little impact
on 5-HT2A receptor function had unpredictable and substantial
eﬀects on its local pharmacology. SNPs in non-coding regions of
5-HT2A associated with schizophrenia (Jönsson et al., 1996) may
also alter the function and expression of the protein, and thus

impact the interaction of DMT at 5-HT2A or other receptors it
competes for. Davies et al. (2006) did not use DMT as a substrate
in their studies, so it is unknown the eﬀect the tested SNPs have
on DMT’s interaction at 5-HT2A receptors.

A one-receptor model of DMT’s eﬀects may be overly
simplistic and fails to take into account, for instance, radioligand
competition assays demonstrating DMT’s binding to 5-HT1A,
5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, 5-HT2C, 5-HT5A, 5-HT6,
and 5-HT7 receptors with a range of aﬃnities as low as 39 nM
(Keiser et al., 2009). It could be endogenous DMT’s interaction
at receptors outside of 5-HT2A plays a role in its putative eﬀects.
For example, selective 5-HT1A blockade with pindolol magniﬁed
subjective responses to DMT by 2- to 3-fold (Strassman, 1996).
To suggest schizophrenia is a psychedelic state that requires a
threshold amount of endogenous DMT at 5-HT2A also requires
understanding dose-response eﬀects for the compound;
i.e.,
non-psychedelic doses of DMT are nevertheless psychoactive
(Strassman et al., 1994).

independently that of

Moreover, adding further complexity to receptor-ligand
interactions, it has become widely recognized that a ligand’s
ability to diﬀerentially activate speciﬁc cellular second messenger
signaling pathways, deﬁned “functional selectivity,” may in
part explain why molecularly similar compounds have varying
degrees of psychoactivity despite binding the same receptor;
i.e., receptors can adopt multiple conformations with which
ligands can selectively bind based on their physical properties.
With regard to G-protein coupled receptor signal transduction
involving 5-HT2A,
the most well-known pathway involves
biding of a ligand to 5-HT2A to activate Gq, which induces
phospholipase C to hydrolyze phosphatidylinositol, which leads
to, amongst other biochemical events, calcium release, and
potentially gene transcription. Another less-deﬁned pathway
has been identiﬁed to occur
the
phospholipase C pathway, wherein a ligand can activate
phospholipase A2 through purported G12/13 signaling, which
hydrolyzes phospholipids containing arachidonic acid and sets
forth a uniquely complex cascade of biochemical events vs. the
phospholipase C pathway. 5-HT was shown to have no diﬀerence
in potency or activity for either the phospholipase C or A2
signal transduction pathways, whereas psychedelics including
DMT and 5-MeO-DMT have proven more potent for the
phospholipase A2 pathway. These data suggest the phospholipase
A2 pathway may be speciﬁc to the hallucinogenic eﬀects of
psychedelic compounds, although their ability to selectively
activate one pathway over the other did not diﬀer (Kurrasch-
Orbaugh et al., 2003; Eshleman et al., 2014). Moreover, SNPs
in 5-HT2C have shown to impact the ability of agonists to
induce speciﬁc signaling cascades within these pathways (Berg
et al., 2001). The use of human cerebral organoid models
in teasing apart which ligands activate which pathways may
prove useful, as these systems are made up of heterologous cell
clusters capable of diﬀerentiating into tissues containing the
cellular makeup of broad brain regions. These cultures include
multiple neuronal cell types and proteins where DMT interacts
including sigma-1 and 5-HT2A/C receptors, and are thus more
representative of an in vivo neuronal system (Dakic et al.,
2017).

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

5

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

Sensitivity to the DMTs may also vary across clinical
populations. Although use of psychedelics is generally well-
tolerated with judicious regard for dosage and set and setting,
there are reports of adverse psychological eﬀects which tend
to associate with those harboring preexisting cases of psychosis
or nonpsychotic bipolar disorder (Bowers and Swigar, 1983;
Hendricks et al., 2015; dos Santos et al., 2017). Davies et al.
(2006) have suggested that SNPs in 5-HT2A in their study that
lower 5-MeO-DMT’s potency may be the genetic basis of such
diﬀerential response to psychedelics and that individuals who
do not bear these mutations and are susceptible to psychosis
have an increased likelihood of exacerbation of its development
following the use of psychedelics. This may be extended to
include a mechanism for how endogenous DMTs play a role
in the development of psychosis; that is, certain SNPs in 5-
HT2A may increase one’s responsiveness to them. It has similarly
been proposed that exogenous psychedelics may modulate the
activity of INMT and the endogenous DMTs and that this may
be intrinsic to their mechanism of action (Barker et al., 1981).
As such, SNPs of these kinds may be of interest to proponents
of administering psychedelics in clinical settings for amelioration
of depression and other ailments, and genetic screening could
reveal patients for whom this practice may not be advisable due to
their heightened propensity for adverse reactions. SNPs in other
genes where DMT interacts may likewise impact its endogenous
function. For instance, polymorphisms in the promoter region
of the serotonin transporter gene, which may likewise function
to remove DMT from the synapse for storage into vesicles
(Cozzi et al., 2009), have been linked to depression and increased
sensitivity to stress (Caspi et al., 2003) (for a thorough review, see
Karg et al., 2011). Further support for this hypothesis is that SNPs
in both AADC and the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4)
have been associated with depression and anxiety in post-partum
populations (Costas et al., 2010).

Aberrant tryptophan metabolism has also been identiﬁed in
autism, wherein SNPs in AADC have been reported (Toma
et al., 2013). Deﬁciencies in melatonin, a hormone produced
mainly in the pineal gland in response to the circadian clock
signal to provide circadian cues, are prevalent in autism (Melke
et al., 2007) as are deﬁcits in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
and overall alterations to the sleep cycle (Limoges et al., 2005;
Buckley et al., 2010). Melatonin likewise utilizes tryptophan as a
synthetic precursor (see Figure 1), and such lowered melatonin
levels could be reﬂective of shunting of tryptophan toward
the synthetic pathway favoring endogenous DMT synthesis.
DMT bears a striking chemical resemblance to melatonin (see
Figure 1) and has recently been identiﬁed in the mammalian
pineal gland (Barker et al., 2013) alongside of INMT (Cozzi
et al., 2011). 5-HO-DMT has been reported in elevated levels
in the urine of autistic individuals (Emanuele et al., 2010),
suggesting the unique mental states associated with autism could
involve the eﬀects of the endogenous DMTs—although much
larger population studies are necessary. The correlations between
melatonin pathways, sleep, and autism have been well-studied
(Pagan et al., 2014).

In summary, current literature does not show a deﬁnitive
association of endogenous DMT or INMT with schizophrenia

and the transmethylation hypothesis. Moreover, it has not been
unequivocally demonstrated whether or not endogenous DMT
levels ever reach concentrations necessary to activate receptors
associated with its psychedelic exogenous eﬀects. However,
genetic and biochemical studies on SNPs in INMT and its
translated protein may provide insight into whether endogenous
DMT may be involved in naturally occurring altered states of
consciousness or serve other physiological roles, and will be the
focus of the remainder of this review.

HUMAN INMT STRUCTURE AND
OBSERVED POLYMORPHISMS

Human INMT is a gene 5,471-bp in length with a reported
792-bp open reading frame that maps to chromosome 7p15.2–
p15.3 and encodes a protein 263-amino acids in length that is
roughly 29 kDa in mass (Thompson et al., 1999). The ∼2.7 Kb
hINMT mRNA sequence contains 2 alternative exon splice sites
that result in translation of two diﬀerent isoforms of the hINMT
protein (isoform 1 = 263 amino acids; NP_006765.4, vs. isoform
2 = 262 amino acids; NP_001186148.1). Though INMT’s ability
to catalyze DMT from tryptamine is the focus of this article,
the enzyme has also been shown to interact with a variety
of thioethers and selenium compounds (Mozier et al., 1988;
Thompson and Weinshilboum, 1998; Thompson et al., 1999; Chu
et al., 2015). A number of nucleotide variants within INMT have
been identiﬁed and will be discussed.

During the initial cloning of hINMT, two SNPs resulting in
nonsynonymous missense mutations were identiﬁed (Thompson
et al., 1999) that have since been conﬁrmed to occur at
frequencies >10% on the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) dbSNP database. These particular mutations
have subsequently been shown to likely be outside of allosteric
and active sites in INMT as will be discussed. Speciﬁcally,
Thompson et al. (1999) observed that codon 205 could be
either methionine (M/Met) or valine (V/Val), and codon 219
could be either glutamic acid (E/Glu) or glycine (G/Gly). The
combinations observed were Met205/Glu219, which has since
been determined to be the reference combination common
to most
individuals, and the mutants Val205/Glu219, and
Met205/Gly219. Recombinant hINMT proteins expressing the
Val205/Glu219 and Met205/Gly219 combinations were created
via transfection of COS-1 cells with hINMT. Upon subsequent
puriﬁcation, and incubation of hINMT with [14C-CH3]AdoMet
as the methyl donor and tryptamine as the methyl acceptor
substrates, the formation of 14C-methylated tryptamine was
monitored for determination of Km.
Km-values provide a logical

framework from which to
access enzyme-substrate interactions
in enzymes obeying
Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Interpretation depends highly on
pH, temperature, and the rates of the reactions of individual
steps making up the whole mechanism. Km, in essence, is an
analysis of how eﬀective an enzyme is at converting substrate
to product and corresponds to substrate concentration at half
the maximum velocity. Low values reﬂect a tighter substrate
binding when the substrate is rate limiting—although this is not

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

6

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

always the case—which infers that a little amount of substrate is
enough for the enzyme to run the reaction at half of its maximum
velocity.

(1999)

Thompson et al.

reported that Km-values

for
tryptamine were identical for both recombinant mutant proteins
(2,920 µM). They then repeated the assays utilizing the rINMT
reference Met205/Glu219 (rINMT shares ∼90% homology to
hINMT, and these two residues are fully conserved), and reported
a Km for tryptamine an order of magnitude lower at 270 µM
vs. the recombinant hINMT mutant variants. They concluded
that the higher Km for hINMT vs. rINMT for tryptamine in
their study suggested tryptamine is not a likely endogenous
substrate in humans, an argument echoed by others deeming
even a 270 µM Km more reﬂective of tryptamine as a “prototypic
substrate” for INMT (Nichols, 2018). However, high Km-values
cannot be taken as evidence against biological activity of a
substrate for an enzyme. As can be accessed on GeneCards
(http://genecards.org), the Km for several enzymes for a given
substrate is often orders of magnitude higher than what is likely
encountered in the environment of the cell; e.g., chymotrypsin
has a Km = 5,000–108,000 µM depending on the substrate,
and thus this value alone cannot dictate a substrate’s biological
endogenous activity for the enzyme. Fersht (1999) illustrates that
though high Km-values correspond to lower binding aﬃnity,
that catalysis often is carried out at a faster reaction rate and
points to glycolytic enzymes that demonstrate catalytic eﬃciency
despite mM aﬃnities. Furthermore, Thompson et al. (1999) drew
their conclusion without directly reporting wildtype hINMT
(Met205/Glu219) Km and comparing it to wildtype rINMT Km,
as it was likely that at this time it was not certain which variant
to declare as the reference. The hINMT mutant protein Km-
values were thus also not compared to those of the human wild
type protein, so it is unknown whether the interspecies wild type
proteins had similar aﬃnities for tryptamine, and further, it is not
clear to what degree the mutations in hINMT aﬀected its activity
in this study.

Although it is likely that the missense mutations caused a
loss of function in hINMT, it cannot be unequivocally declared
from comparison of wildtype enzyme activity from one species
to mutants of another. Comparing Km-values across experiments
further exposes other caveats. For instance, Chu et al. (2014)
reported a Km for tryptamine following incubation of INMT
from rabbit lung homogenate at 852 µM utilizing assays adapted
from Thompson and Weinshilboum (1998), Thompson et al.
(1999), results which diﬀer roughly 4-fold vs. what Thompson
et al. (1999) reported for rINMT.

Furthermore, a Km for tryptamine for puriﬁed hINMT
wild type protein expressed in Escherichia coli has been
reported at 850 µM (Chu et al., 2015), which suggests that
the mutations observed in Thompson et al.’s (1999) study
decreased hINMT’s ability to form N-methyltryptamine and
perhaps DMT. Comparing the results of both Chu studies
(2014 vs. 2015) suggests a similar Km for rabbit and human
INMT, which counters the interpretation of Thompson et al.
(1999) that tryptamine may not be an endogenous substrate
for hINMT. Moreover, a prior study on methyltransferase
activity in human lung preparations reports a Km-value for

tryptamine of 430 µM (Räisänen and Kärkkäinen, 1978). One
may consider the activity of the INMT protein in homogenate
to be more representative of its function in vivo, complete
with possible endogenous inhibitors and activators, and the
puriﬁed protein to counterintuitively be more of an artiﬁcial
system void of many of the other proteins and substrates
that interact with INMT in the whole organism, although the
lower Km reported for the homogenate could be indicative of
the presence of endogenous tryptamine. The INMT proteins
isolated from the crude homogenate, however, may also
not be the reference protein sequence, further complicating
interpretation. Of further note is that this study (Räisänen
and Kärkkäinen, 1978) used mass spectrometry to monitor the
formation of methylated tryptamines rather than 14C-methylated
tryptamines.

Future studies could therefore assess the formation of N-
methyltryptamine or DMT following incubation with tryptamine
or N-methyltryptamine, rather than incubate with and monitor
the formation of non-endogenous radioactive tryptamines.
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and/or mass
spectrometry can be employed to quantitate these results. This
will aﬀord more accurate data better reﬂective of INMT’s
function in vivo. Future studies assessing the impact of
INMT variation should consider these shortcomings when
designing experiments to be conducted within the context
of the same protocol parameters; e.g., holding constant the
same cell systems, substrates, and quantitation. In addition,
reports of Vmax, Km/Vmax, and Kcat/Km will also provide
greater insight into steps in the reaction pathway. To the
latter point, Thompson et al. (2001) and the Chu et al. (2014,
2015) studies have taken such important steps. Despite their
caveats, the studies outlined above have provided a valuable
blueprint for investigating the biological relevance of mutations
in hINMT. This approach oﬀers the potential
to observe
the molecular implications of clinical ﬁndings from genetic
screens relevant to the transmethylation hypothesis and other
pathophysiological states wherein INMT is implicated, as will be
discussed.

To further such research, the SNPs identiﬁed in these studies
(and the studies outlined hereafter) as well as SNPs entered
into the NCBI dbSNP database were compiled into Figure 2,
which shows all currently known SNPs and the amino acid
positions at which they occur in the hINMT coding region.
The NCBI dbSNP database has amassed SNPs in INMT from
several sources. Several of the SNPs have been validated by
multiple independent submissions, the HapMap project, and/or
the 1000Genome project. The database does not remove un-
validated SNPs unless user submitters later report it as artifact,
as it is often their validation is aﬃrmed through subsequent
genotyping. Figure 2 reports all such SNPs, making known those
that have been validated. Figure 2 also reports conservation
between hINMT and several mammalian species (see Figure 2
legend and section Methods for details). It may be that INMT
amino acid residues unique to humans and primates and SNPs
therein may be more relevant to the discussion of INMT and
DMT with regard to its possible involvement in higher brain
activity, whereas amino acid residues fully conserved across lower

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

FIGURE 2 | Alterations to the human INMT protein coding region due to single nucleotide polymorphisms. Current literature was consulted to identify amino acid
residues in mammalian INMT likely critical to structure/function. The block black arrows at the far left denote the human INMT amino acid reference sequence.
Numbers on the far left and right below each row indicate ﬁrst and last residue numbers in that row. Sequence conservation in human INMT across the mammalian
species outlined in Methods is reported underneath each amino acid of the reference sequence as “*”= a fully-conserved residue, “:”= a strongly similar residue, and
“.”= a weakly conserved residue. Non-conservation of an amino acid is denoted by absence of these symbols. The amino acids highlighted in yellow are highly
conserved regions across the mammalian species compared as well as conserved across methyltransferase enzymes that utilize AdoMet. The amino acids
highlighted in light blue are the N-terminal helix-loop-helix region reported to function as an allosteric binding site in hINMT. Residues boxed in red were found to be
important to tryptamine binding in rINMT and are conserved in humans; those boxed in light blue represent the same for AdoMet binding. The blue arrows are exon
sites. Synonymous SNPs in an amino acid are denoted via underlining of that residue. Missense mutations appear as red amino acid residues in the reference
sequence, and the resulting change in this residue is indicated by the letter(s) appearing directly above the red reference residue. A “+” above a reference sequence
residue indicates a reported nonsense mutation. Point mutations leading to frame shifts are shown in blue as the resultant altered amino acid residue above the
corresponding reference residue. SNPs validated by either multiple independent submissions, the HapMap project and/or the 1000Genome project are denoted by
italics or angular underlines. Reported frequencies of each synonymous and nonsynonymous SNP are as follows: black = unknown, brown = <1%, green = 1–10%,
red = >10%. No frequencies for frameshift point mutations (blue letters above the reference sequence) were currently reported. Multiple SNPs were often observed at
the same reference amino acid residue; e.g., a SNP, in residue 58, threonine (red T), can change the residue to methionine (brown M) at a reported frequency of <1%,
whereas a synonymous SNP and a frameshift mutation resulting in a change to isoleucine (blue I) are also reported at unknown frequencies at residue 58. Reported
frequencies of SNPs are ﬂuid, and the dbSNP database should be re-examined often to make updates to this ﬁgure to match up-to-date literature and subsequent
additions to or retractions from the database.

vertebrates could reﬂect a diﬀerent mutual function of INMT that
is not involved in such processes.

Chu et al. (2014) hypothesized an allosteric inhibitory binding
site for DMT in hINMT based on in silico modeling using
its crystal structure (Wu et al., 2005) and assays incubating
DMT with rabbit lung homogenate. rINMT pre-incubated with
100 µM DMT was found to raise the Km for tryptamine from 852
to 1,618 µM. Amino acid residues 25–34 (light blue highlighted
region in Figure 2) were conﬁrmed as an N-terminal helix-
loop-helix region outside of the enzyme active site where DMT
displayed mixed competitive and noncompetitive kinetics. DMT
interacts at this site via formation of hydrogen bonds with Asp28
(D) and Glu34 (E) (Chu et al., 2014). As can be seen in Figure 2, a

highly frequent human SNP (>10%) in codon 28, which is weakly
conserved across mammals, results in a missense mutation to
asparagine (N/Asn), whereas a nonsense mutation in codon 34,
which is fully conserved across mammals, is reported at an
unknown frequency. It was recently proposed that inhibition of
INMT by DMT would likely prevent endogenous DMT from
ever reaching concentrations necessary to activate its receptors
(Nichols, 2018), but it may be that the mutations in these residues
results in disruption of this allosteric mechanism, which can be
tested in vitro.

In

another

the
al.,
AdoMet docking region for
rINMT and rat catechol-O-
methyltransferase (COMT) were found to be the same via an

(Thompson

2001),

study

et

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

approach, wherein
experimentally-informed computational
Tyr69 (Y) (via cation-pi interactions), and Gly63 (G), Ser64
(S), Thr87 (T), Glu92 (E), and Glu116 (E) (vi H-bonding)
were all found to facilitate its docking in rINMT (all fully
conserved between rINMT and hINMT). Residues important
to rINMT-tryptamine binding (fully conserved between rINMT
and hINMT unless noted in the following) were deciphered to be
Lys39 (K) and Gln200 (Q) (R/Arg in hINMT) (via H-bonding),
Glu43 (E), Val138 (V), and Ile202 (I) (P/Pro in hINMT) (via van
der Waals interactions), and Tyr69 (Y) (via pi-pi interactions)
(Thompson et al., 2001). These residues were compared to
hINMT NCBI dbSNP entries to ascertain SNPs in the purported
hINMT AdoMet and tryptamine binding sites for entry into
Figure 2. The light blue boxes in Figure 2 mark the conserved
residues between the reference hINMT and rINMT AdoMet
binding site whereas the red boxes mark the same for the
tryptamine binding site. As seen in Figure 2, SNPs occur at
Glu43 (E), Gly63 (G), Thr87 (T), Glu92 (E), Glu116 (E), and
Val138 (V), and may aﬀect INMT aﬃnity for AdoMet and/or
tryptamine. hINMT residues Arg200 and Pro202, though not
conserved between species, also have observed SNPs that may
impact tryptamine binding. Conservation was found between
the hINMT and hCOMT AdoMet for Gly63 and Glu116 only,
upon alignment with Clustal Omega.

COMT breaks down catecholamines such as dopamine via
introduction of a methyl group utilizing AdoMet, and SNPs
therein have been implicated in frontal lobe function and risk
for schizophrenia (Egan et al., 2001). Certain allele diﬀerences
have been further noted to impact working memory, and
cognitive (Bertolino et al., 2004; Weickert et al., 2004) and
dose-responses (Inada et al., 2003) to antipsychotic compounds.
Regions of amino acid conservation exist between mammalian
COMT and INMT (the ﬁrst and third yellow-highlighted
regions in Figure 2), and one modeling study suggested that
the folding of rINMT may be similar to that of rat COMT
(Thompson et al., 2001). The ﬁrst yellow-highlighted region
in Figure 2 is conserved across methyltransferases that utilize
AdoMet and contains residues important for its binding. Clustal
Omega yielded residues of conservation between hINMT and
hCOMT (all of these comparisons were made following Clustal
Omega alignment of human INMT isoform 1 and human
COMT; ascension #: CAG33278.1). Residue Gly63 (of hINMT)
is suggested in modulating AdoMet binding in both enzymes,
and is conserved. INMT residues Pro189, Leu193, and Thr195
(of hINMT), although not in a binding region, are conserved
between the enzymes as well. It may be that these conserved
domains inform their functional signiﬁcance and SNPs seen
therein (the yellow regions in Figure 2) may similarly impact
INMT’s methylating capabilities. A key SNP site reported in
schizophrenic studies, Val158Met, negates the ability of COMT
to breakdown/methylate dopamine and thus increases the overall
amount of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex (Egan et al., 2001;
Bertolino et al., 2004; Weickert et al., 2004). This SNP, however,
is not conserved or aligned with a region in the INMT reference
sequence.

Informed by their model, Thompson et al. (2001) also
conducted substrate kinetics on rabbit Val138, centered in the

putative active site of the folded INMT protein. Mutation of
this residue to tryptophan (W/Trp) increased the Km of rabbit
wild type INMT from 430 to 3,500 µM, presumably due to
introduction of steric hindrance to the active site (Thompson
et al., 2001). However, it should be noted no such SNP has yet to
be reported in humans (a missense mutation to the only slightly
more-bulky amino acid leucine [L/Leu] and a synonymous
mutation were entered into dbSNP; see Figure 2). Residue 202
was also predicted to be of importance to the INMT active site
in both rabbits and humans in their modeling. This residue,
however, diﬀers in rabbits (S/Ser) and (P/Pro) humans. This
prompted the authors (Thompson et al., 2001) to mutate rabbit
Ser202Pro, which resulted in an increase in Km to 1,270 µM.
Their interpretation was that Pro202 in humans may account for
the reported higher Km of hINMT for tryptamine vs. for rINMT,
but this study again could beneﬁt from a direct comparison for
a wild type Km of hINMT for tryptamine for direct intra-study
comparison. Table 1 summarizes the main ﬁndings of all of the
studies discussed in the above section.

INMT POLYMORPHISMS IDENTIFIED IN
GENETIC SCREENS

Recent genetic studies have indicated SNPs in hINMT that likely
aﬀect function in relation to certain phenotypes/populations.
Following patient genotyping, His46Pro, Pro188Leu, Gly218Glu,
and Cys253Phe were found to be SNPs in the coding region of
hINMT associated with the intestinal disease, Hirschsprung’s—
deﬁned by absence of ganglion cells in the colon—in Korean
subjects (Kim et al., 2015). It should be noted that the numbering
on all but the His46Pro SNP are exclusive to hINMT isoform 2
(NP_001186148.1), whereas isoform 1 (NP_006765.4) was used
for generation of Figure 2. Isoform 2 is shortened by 1 residue
(262 vs. 263; amino acid Gly52 is absent in isoform 2), and it
may be that speciﬁc splice isoforms of hINMT associate with
certain phenotypes such as Hirschsprung’s disease (these 3 SNPs
are referenced as Pro189, Glu219, and Phe254 on isoform 1 on
dbSNP and in Figure 2; it should further be noted that reference
and SNP residues in positions 218 and 253 are reversed in
Kim et al. (2015) vs. their inputting on dbSNP; i.e., they are
Glu218Gly and Phe253Cys on the latter database, and Figure 2
reﬂects the dbSNP indexing at isoform 1 on codons 219 and
254). SNPs were also found in the non-coding region of INMT
intronic region (3
including the promoter region (6 total),
total), and the 3
-untranslated region (2 total), which could
feasibly aﬀect mRNA transcription and translation of INMT.
The authors performed in silico analysis of His46Pro, which
is not highly conserved among mammals (see Figure 2), to
determine that this mutation is likely to cause damage to the
protein. The association of INMT with Hirschsprung’s may be
related to the documented absence of serotonergic neurons in
the gut in those with the disease (Rogawski et al., 1978). Kim
et al. (2015) concluded that a lowered amount of serotonin in
relation to His46Pro may lead to lower eﬃciency of enteric
neural crest migration, the most well-documented cause of the
disease.

′

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

TABLE 1 | Summary of biochemical assays on INMT from studies reviewed.

INMT sequence alteration

Species

Substrate(s) reported

Km (µM)

Cell type

Publication

Reference

Uncertain

Uncertain

Reference

Trp138

Pro202

Reference

Val205/Glu219

Met205/Gly219

Uncertain

Human

Rabbit

Rabbit

Rabbit

Rabbit

Rabbit

Rabbit

Human

Human

Human

Tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine + DMT
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
[14C-CH3]AdoMet + tryptamine
Tryptamine

850

852

1,618

430

3,500

1,270

270

2,920

2,920

430

E. coli

Chu et al., 2015

Lung homogenate

Chu et al., 2014

Lung homogenate

Chu et al., 2014

COS-1

COS-1

COS-1

COS-1

COS-1

COS-1

Thompson et al., 2001

Thompson et al., 2001

Thompson et al., 2001

Thompson et al., 1999

Thompson et al., 1999

Thompson et al., 1999

Lung homogenate

Räisänen and Kärkkäinen, 1978

INMT regulates the N-methylation of

tryptamines, and
tryptophan is the required precursor for both tryptamine and
serotonin biosynthesis. Tryptophan can either be converted to
DMT via the previously mentioned AADC-INMT pathway, or
to 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan via tryptophan hydroxylase and then
to serotonin following decarboxylation via AADC. Moreover,
serotonin can be methylated by INMT to form 5-HO-DMT
(bufotenine), a compound with anecdotal psychedelic properties
that reportedly exhibits higher aﬃnity for 5-HT2A than DMT
(Ray, 2010; Shen et al., 2010), although serotonin activity at
the enzyme is lower than for tryptamine (Mandell and Morgan,
1971; Thompson and Weinshilboum, 1998). These pathways
are outlined in Figure 1. In light of this, the ﬁnding of INMT
SNPs linked to an intestinal disease like Hirschsprung’s becomes
intriguing when coupled to a report of DMT and 5-HO-DMT
in human stool (Kärkkäinen et al., 2005). This could suggest
a peripheral regulatory role for DMT and/or 5-HO-DMT in
gastrointestinal function, as serotonin has a well-characterized
role therein. A recent study also found an association between
selective serotonin uptake inhibitor use and increased risk of a
child developing Hirschsprung’s (Nielsen et al., 2017), adding
more data to a recent line of inquisition into a gut-brain link in
association with depressive states. Indeed, 95% of all serotonin
in the body is found in the gut, despite its known criticality for
maintaining homeostatic brain physiology.

The enteric nervous system contains several 5-HT receptor
subtypes within families 5-HT1–5-HT7 expressed on multiple
cell types; e.g., enteric neurons, and enterochromaﬃn cells
within epithelial mucosa that are located in close proximity
with immune cells also known to express 5-HT receptors.
5-HT mediates several aspects of enteric physiology; e.g.,
peristalsis, and colonic contraction, as well as responses to
pathophysiological events through interaction at these sites
(Hasler, 2009; Manocha and Khan, 2012). Hirschprung’s is
not only characterized by abnormal enteric development, but
inﬂammation is also a commonly observed complication of the
disease (Frykman and Short, 2012). Agonism at the 5-HT2B
receptor, where DMT has displayed moderate aﬃnity (Blair
et al., 1999; Keiser et al., 2009), appears to be critical for proper
enteric development (Gershon and Ratcliﬀe, 2004) and activation
of 5-HT1 and 5-HT2 receptors by endogenous psychedelics

such as DMT and 5-HO-DMT may signiﬁcantly interfere
with the intracellular cascade within immune cells to lead to
suppression of the production of inﬂammatory cytokines (Szabo,
2015). This eﬀect has been demonstrated following induction
of inﬂammation in human primary monocyte-derived dendritic
cells pretreated with 100 µM of DMT (Szabo et al., 2014). Similar
involvement of DMT in inﬂammation pathways was reported by
Dakic et al. (2017), who tested broad changes in the human neural
proteome following 5-MeO-DMT application utilizing human
cerebral organoids. They reported several diﬀerences in protein
expression between vehicle (0.3% ethanol) and treatment group
(24-h incubation with 5-MeO-DMT) via mass spectrometry.
However, the 13 µM dose utilized is much greater than what
a brain would naturally encounter. Such a system nonetheless
represents a step in the direction of determining not only an
endogenous role for the DMTs, but also the concentrations that
may be necessary to induce such molecular changes. The impact
of lower doses of the DMTs in the same or similar protocols could
elucidate this. The INMT upregulation observed in Hirschprung’s
thus suggests a feasible physiological role for the DMT’s in proper
enteric function worthy of future investigation.

Another recent GWAS conducted on poor metabolizers
of selenium, a substrate methylated by INMT, showed SNPs
in INMT to signiﬁcantly associate with blood and urinary
trimethylselenonium ion concentrations, a common selenium
metabolite (Kuehnelt et al., 2015). The top SNPs were Phe254Cys
(F254C in Figure 2, a coding region high frequency SNP in
a highly conserved residue), and two lead SNPs in the 3′
untranslated region of INMT in complete linkage disequilibrium;
i.e., non-random association indicating conserved mutual
inheritance. These SNPs were indexed as rs6970396 (in an
enhancer region) and rs1061644 (in an open chromatin region),
and do not appear in Figure 2 as they are outside the
coding region. Of the Bangladesh women sampled, those with
reference/wild type rs6970396 (nucleotide reference G instead
of base A) had lower levels of the trimethylselenonium ion
metabolite. Levels of this metabolite were also associated with
low levels were found in
a dosage eﬀect of this allele; i.e.,
those homozygous for the reference (nucleotides GG), and
increasingly higher levels for heterozygous and homozygous
base A, respectively (i.e., nucleotides AG<AA for increase in

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

10

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

the trimethylselenonium ion metabolite) were observed. Because
INMT methylates selenium compounds, inheriting the A allele
leads to a gain of function of this mechanism or its occurrence,
and theoretically the same for the methylation of tryptamine
to form DMT. The A allele was found to result in gain of two
transcription factor binding sites (GATA1, GATA2) and loss
of 2 others (PEA3, XBP1). XBP1, one of the lost transcription
factors associated with inheriting the A allele,
is linked to
immune/inﬂammatory responses (Iwakoshi et al., 2003) and
cellular endoplasmic reticulum stress response (Yoshida et al.,
2006)—two functions recently proposed for DMT (Frecska et al.,
2013; Szabo et al., 2016).

Moreover, the Phe254Cys SNP (nucleotide T to G; also
in
referenced rs4720015) was closely situated to rs6970396,
complete linkage disequilibrium with both 3′ SNPs, and
associated with lower levels of the trimethylselenonium ion
vs. the reference Phe254. Despite not being at the active site,
which is strongly conserved among mammals, this residue was
predicted to aﬀect INMT protein structure and/or function (via
http://sift.jcvi.org and http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/).
The ancestral T allele in rs1061644 (vs. the C allele) was also
associated with high concentrations of the trimethylselenonium
ion as well as with a gain of two binding sites (TFAP2A,
Enktf1) and a loss of three others (cJun, ATF3, ER-alpha).
Thus, variation in the non-coding region of
INMT was
associated with either a gain of methylation activity or enzymatic
expression, or a combination of both, for INMT as assessed
in relation to the above alleles via urinary trimethylselenonium
ion concentrations using HPLC and inductively coupled plasma
further interest to the 3 SNP sites
mass spectrometry. Of
reported in the selenium GWAS study is that
the lowest
frequencies for rs6970396 (nucleotide A), rs1061644 (nucleotide
T), and wild type rs4720015 (Phe254/nucleotide T) alleles were
reported for the Argentinian Andean (1.5%) and Peruvian
(5%) cohorts. Thus, these populations appear to have the least
active INMT methyltransferase activity (for selenium) of the
several populations investigated. This is of interest because the
DMT-containing brew ayahuasca has been pervasive in the
indigenous cultures of South America for centuries (McKenna,
2004; McKenna and Riba, 2018). It is not necessarily the case
that selenium binds to the same docking sites on the INMT
enzyme as tryptamine. But INMT overall expression is likely
lower in comparison to wild type in these populations, and it can
therefore be inferred that lower levels of the endogenous DMTs
may be observed as well. These allelic variations are however
more than likely linked to dietary diﬀerences in these populations
with regard to INMT’s methylation of selenium.

The selenium study (Kuehnelt et al., 2015) illustrates how
multiple SNPs can be inherited that collectively may impact
the methylating capacity of INMT. To further illustrate this
complexity, the public access genome of molecular biology
pioneer James Watson was analyzed for SNPs in his INMT
coding region that may aﬀect INMT protein function. Using
the UCSC Genome Browser (GRCh37/hg19), four such SNPs
in James Watsons’s INMT (isoform 1) that led to missense
mutations were found. These were: D28N, M205V, E219G, and
F254C (Figure 3A). As can be seen in Figure 2, D28N is in
the allosteric loop wherein DMT binds to inhibit INMT. The

relevance of these SNPs in concert with regard to protein function
remains unknown, but can be assayed, and each of these SNPs
has been speciﬁcally discussed throughout this manuscript. The
UCSC Genome Browser was also used to align DDC (another
nomenclature for AADC) isoform 2 to the Watson genome
(Figure 3B), as SNPs leading to alterations in AADC protein
expression or function may be pertinent to INMT function
and the mechanism of DMT synthesis (see Figure 1). There
have been reports of enhancement of creativity and divergent
thinking following the use of psychedelics (Harman et al.,
1966; Sessa, 2008; Baggott, 2015) including ayahausca (Frecska
et al., 2012; Kuypers et al., 2016). From Kekulé’s closed-eye
visions of tetravalent whirling snakes leading to the discovery
of the structure of benzene, to an ethereal hairpin melody from
Brian Wilson’s paracusia, the question arises, “Can endogenous
psychedelics, such as DMT, aid in facilitating the egression of
exceptional thought-processes from the mundane?”

Piechota et al. (2012) used a whole-genome microarray
proﬁling technique to assess temporal transcriptional alterations
in mice during 12 days of administration of methamphetamine
or heroin and following a 12-day withdrawal period. Among
the 27 genes identiﬁed, they found INMT mRNA expression
was gradually enriched in the rodent nucleus accumbens of
basal forebrain and to a lesser degree the dorsal striatum during
administration of both compounds. The highest expression
was in the heroin group and observed on day 6, and levels
descended to basal activity during withdrawal. The authors
concluded that INMT up-regulation and subsequent increase
in DMT synthesis may be responsible for the psychotropic
eﬀects of drug-withdrawal. However, recent data shows that
human administration of psychedelics structurally related to
and including DMT can ameliorate the symptoms of addiction
(Grob et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 2014; Mithoefer et al., 2016), as
well as comorbid disease states such as depression (Osório et al.,
2015; Carhart-Harris et al., 2016, 2017) in which self-medicating
is a hallmark (Markou et al., 1998), wherein the degree of the
positive therapeutic outcome correlates with the magnitude of
the peak acute psychological eﬀects (Roseman et al., 2018). A
recent study has shown a decrease in retinal and occipital cortex
neuronal response to color contrast in depressed individuals
(Bubl et al., 2015) suggesting a scientiﬁc basis for the often-
experienced “lack of color” in this illness. INMT has been found
in the monkey retina (Cozzi et al., 2011), and underproduction of
a molecule such as DMT—known to evoke heightened perception
of color—may be one molecular mechanism behind such changes
in perception in depression. Moreover, application of high doses
of 5-MeO-DMT to human neuronal organoid cultures led to
up-regulation of integrins, which is also observed in depressive
patients that respond well to antidepressants (Dakic et al., 2017).
DMT has also been proposed to serve an anxiolytic role via its
binding at the trace amine receptor (Jacob and Presti, 2005),
which would not necessitate endogenous levels reaching those of
a psychedelic dose.

Dakic et al. (2017) also identiﬁed a down-regulation of
metabotropic glutamate receptor 5, and knockout of this protein
or its antagonism in mice leads to attenuation of addictive
behaviors (Dakic et al., 2017). Thus, the upregulation of INMT
observed by Piechota et al. (2012) may be reﬂective of increased

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

11

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

FIGURE 3 | SNPs in James Watson’s INMT isoform 1 and DDC isoform 2 from UCSC Genome Browser. (A) SNPs found in James Watson’s INMT isoform 1. Coding
region SNPs are in black and seen in exons 1 and 3 as noted: D28N, M205V, E219G, and F254C. These SNPs are discussed in detail in the text. The INMT sequence
highlighted black reﬂects isoform 1. (B) SNPs found in James Watson’s DDC isoform 2. The DDC sequence highlighted blue at the top of the ﬁgure reﬂects isoform 2.
The two genes are not shown comparatively to scale.

endogenous DMT synthesis following the addictive behavior,
although DMT was not tested in the proteomics study. Chronic
administration of methamphetamine in rodents also induces up-
regulation of sigma-1 receptor mRNA (Stefanski et al., 2004).
DMT is a sigma-1 receptor agonist (Fontanilla et al., 2009), and
agonism at this receptor has been shown to ameliorate depressive
behavior in rodents (Moriguchi et al., 2014). Conversely, sigma-
1 knockout mice display depressive behaviors; e.g., immobility
in the forced swim test (Sabino et al., 2009), although such
a conclusion drawn from this data may be erroneously
interpretating the loss of a hyperlocomotion response, which is
known to be mediated in part via sigma-1 receptor agonism
(Fontanilla et al., 2009), as depression. Methamphetamine also
binds to sigma-1 receptors and it may be this interaction
is responsible for their up-regulation in addiction. However,
sigma-1 knockout mice still exhibit hyperlocomotion when
administered methamphetamine whereas they no longer respond
in this manner to DMT (Fontanilla et al., 2009). INMT is also
localized to postsynaptic sites of C-terminals of rodent motor
neurons in close proximity to sigma-1 receptors (Mavlyutov
et al., 2012), perhaps providing an anatomical
foundation
to a proposed role of INMT and DMT in regulating the
hypermobility response associated with addiction. However, that
sigma-1 receptors are so ubiquitously expressed throughout
mammalian tissues and are chaperone proteins integral
to
calcium signaling suggests this colocalization may not be of
unique signiﬁcance to motor neurons. It may also simply be that
the up-regulation of INMT observed by Piechota et al. (2012)
reﬂected INMT’s reported N-methylation of xenobiotics for their
degradation.

CONCLUSION

This review has focused on assessing prior studies on endogenous
DMT employing analytical chemistry and pharmacological
is known regarding variation
assays and amassing what
in the INMT enzyme from the results of genetic- and
biochemical-based studies. Figure 2 represents a summary of
the latter data. It also suggests potential solutions to current
shortcomings of approaches toward understanding whether there
is a physiological role for the endogenous DMTs. Current
literature employing population genetics and gene expression-
based protocols supports a possible role of the DMT-synthesizing
INMT gene in drug addiction. Less support exists with respect
to psychosis viz. the transmethylation hypothesis, as GWAS
studies have yet to associate INMT with such phenotypes.
Furthermore,
it is likely that if the endogenous DMTs are
involved in conscious experience—normal or abnormal—that
several receptors, proteins, and enzymes that regulate and/or
utilize tryptophan and tryptamine will function at diﬀerent
eﬃcacies in diﬀerent
individuals in association with such
phenotypes as inﬂuenced by their genetic code. Epigenetics
has also shown that gene expression can be inﬂuenced by
environment, experience, and learning, though these discussions
are beyond the scope of this review.

Figure 1 outlines some of the diﬀerent enzymes and substrates
in the endogenous DMT pathways discussed throughout this
article. Combined with Figure 2, the complexity of the molecular
biology potentially associated with subjective experience and
behavioral phenotypes points
such
associative data. Furthermore, although INMT SNPs identiﬁed

to the limitations of

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

12

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

in genetic screens of populations with a phenotype of interest
can be assessed using in vitro models, such models function
outside of the organismal level and should also be interpreted
with this in mind. Although SNPs identiﬁed by GWAS represent
codons of interest with potential to change gene and protein
function when identiﬁed in a gene such as INMT, they are
not always causal. Depending on the nature of these studies,
they may rather indicate that the causal SNP is nearby. A
powerful approach recently implemented in in vitro work is to
culture cells from actual patients/populations presenting with
phenotypes/SNPs of interest. This model may be employed to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of INMT and endogenous
DMT and represents an important compliment to synthetic
approaches utilizing recombinant INMT proteins (such as those
outlined in Table 1).

It may be that

Understanding how the presence of multiple SNPs in INMT
aﬀects INMT protein expression and function with regard
to DMT synthesis is required to elucidate the function of
endogenous DMT (as outlined in Figure 3A). Particular SNPs
in INMT may be found to alter the levels of endogenous
DMT in diﬀerent populations.
the same
patients/populations similarly present with SNPs in the coding
or non-coding regions of DMT receptors that alter the sensitivity
to endogenous DMT. Though studies combining computational
and biochemical approaches have been undertaken (Davies
et al., 2006; Keiser et al., 2009), compuational power has vastly
increased in the interim since their publication. Combining these
expanded genetic and biochemical protocols will be valuable to
the study of the endogenous DMTs with regard to normal and
abnormal mental states as well as other proposed physiological
roles for DMT such as mediating aspects of inﬂammation and
immunomodulation.

∗

the generation of

chimpanzee (JAA26545.1), monkey (NP_001253042.1), rabbit
(AAC97491.1), mouse (EDK98723.1), rat (NP_001102492.1),
pig (NP_001231662.1), and cow (NP_001179577.1). These
sequences were entered into Clustal Omega for sequence
”= a fully-conserved
alignment. Conservation was reported as “
residue, “:”= a strongly similar residue, and “.”= a weakly
conserved residue. Next, all known frequencies (at the time
of
this ﬁgure) of reported synonymous,
nonsynonymous, and frameshift-causing SNPs in human INMT
(geneID: 11185) were determined using NCBI’s dbSNP database
(plus strand; NP_006765.4; SNP GeneView reports GRCh38)
and entered into the ﬁgure as described in the Figure 2 legend.
Figure 2 was then adapted to also reﬂect known literature
on INMT SNPs conserved and deemed important for active
and allosteric site function as well as SNPs suspected to be
deleterious to proper protein folding (Thompson et al., 1999,
2001; Wu et al., 2005; Chu et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2015;
Kuehnelt et al., 2015). These SNPs were entered into the
ﬁgure as applicable and are described in detail in the Figure 2
legend.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
approved it for publication.

FUNDING

Funding was provided by the Department of Molecular and
Integrative Physiology at the University of Michigan.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

METHODS

Generation of INMT Polymorphism Figure 2
INMT amino acid coding region sequences were obtained
from the NCBI database for: human isoform 1 (NP_006765.4),

Comments on the manuscript by Jimo Borjigin, George
Mashour, Michael Wang, Steven Barker, Melissa Englund,
Michael Brito, Kate Fleming, Ana Ortiz Bernal, Rick
Strassman, Nick Barbush, and Rafael Lancelotta are deeply
appreciated.

REFERENCES

Axelrod,

J.
metabolites
doi: 10.1126/science.134.3475.343

(1961).
from normally

Enzymatic

formation

of
compounds.

psychotomimetic
134:343.
Science

occurring

Baggott, M. J. (2015). Psychedelics and creativity: a review of the quantitative

literature. PeerJ PrePrints 3:e1202v1. doi: 10.7287/peerj.preprints.1202v1

Barker, S. A., Beaton, J. M., Christian, S. T., Monti, J. A., and Morris, P. E. (1984).
In vivo metabolism of α,α,β,β-tetradeutero-n, N-dimethyltryptamine in rodent
brain. Biochem. Pharmacol. 33, 1395–1400. doi: 10.1016/0006-2952(84)90404-0
Barker, S. A., Borjigin, J., Lomnicka, I., and Strassman, R. (2013). LC/MS/MS
analysis of
their
precursors, and major metabolites in rat pineal gland microdialysate.
Biomed. Chromatogr. 27, 1690–1700. doi: 10.1002/bmc.2981

endogenous dimethyltryptamine hallucinogens,

the

Barker, S. A., McIlhenny, E. H., and Strassman, R. (2012). A critical review
of reports of endogenous psychedelic N, N-dimethyltryptamines in humans:
1955-2010. Drug Test. Anal. 4, 617–635. doi: 10.1002/dta.422

Barker, S. A., Monti, J. A., and Christian, S. T. (1981). N, N-dimethyltryptamine:
83–110.

Rev. Neurobiol.

endogenous

Int.

22,

an
doi: 10.1016/S0074-7742(08)60291-3

hallucinogen.

Berg, K. A., Cropper, J. D., Niswender, C. M., Sanders-Bush, E., Emeson, R.
B., and Clarke, W. P. (2001). RNA-editing of the 5-HT2C receptor alters
agonist-receptor-eﬀector coupling speciﬁcity. Br. J. Pharmacol. 134, 386–392.
doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0704255

Bertolino, A., Caforio, G., Blasi, G., De Candia, M., Latorre, V., Petruzzella, V.,
et al. (2004). Interaction of COMT (Val(108/158)Met) genotype and olanzapine
treatment on prefrontal cortical function in patients with schizophrenia. Am. J.
Psychiatry 161, 1798–1805. doi: 10.1176/ajp.161.10.1798

Blair, J. B., Marona-Lewicka, D., Kanthasamy, A., Lucaites, V. L., Nelson,
D. L., and Nichols, D. E. (1999). Thieno[3,2-b]- and Thieno[2,3-b]pyrrole
bioisosteric analogues of the hallucinogen and serotonin agonist, N.,N-
dimethyltryptamine. J. Med. Chem. 42, 1106–1111. doi: 10.1021/jm980692q
Blough, B. E., Landavazo, A., Decker, A. M., Partilla, J. S., Baumann, M. H., and
Rothman, R. B. (2014). Interaction of psychoactive tryptamines with biogenic
amine transporters and serotonin receptor subtypes. Psychopharmacology 231,
4135–4144. doi: 10.1007/s00213-014-3557-7

Bowers, M. B., and Swigar, M. E. (1983). Vulnerability to psychosis associated with
hallucinogen use. Psychiatry Res. 9, 91–97. doi: 10.1016/0165-1781(83)90030-6
Bruns, D., Riedel, D., Klingauf, J., and Jahn, R. (2000). Quantal release of serotonin.

Neuron 28, 205–220. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)00097-0

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

13

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

Bubl, E., Kern, E., Ebert, D., Riedel, A., Tebartz van Elst, L., and Bach, M.
(2015). Retinal dysfunction of contrast processing in major depression also
apparent in cortical activity. Eur. Arch. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 265, 343–350.
doi: 10.1007/s00406-014-0573-x

Buckley, A. W., Rodriguez, A. J., Jennison, K., Buckley, J., Thurm, A., Sato, S., et al.
(2010). REM sleep percentage in children with autism compared to children
with developmental delay and typical development. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc.
Med. 164, 1032–1037. doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.202

Bumpus, F. M., and Page, I. H. (1955). Serotonin and its methylated derivatives in

human urine. J. Biol. Chem. 212, 111–116.

Cakic, V., Potkonyak, J., and Marshall, A. (2010). Dimethyltryptamine (DMT):
subjective eﬀects and patterns of use among Australian recreational users. Drug
Alcohol Depend. 111, 30–37. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.03.015

Carhart-Harris, R. L., Bolstridge, M., Rucker, J., Day, C. M., Erritzoe, D., Kaelen,
M., et al. (2016). Psilocybin with psychological support for treatment-resistant
depression: an open-label feasibility study. Lancet Psychiatry 3, 619–627.
doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30065-7

Carhart-Harris, R. L., Roseman, L., Bolstridge, M., Demetriou, L., Pannekoek,
treatment-resistant
7:13187.

(2017). Psilocybin for
brain mechanisms.

J. N., Wall, M. B., et al.
depression:
fMRI-measured
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13282-7

Sci. Rep.

Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moﬃtt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., Harrington, H., et al.
(2003). Inﬂuence of life stress on depression: moderation by a polymorphism
in the 5-HTT gene. Science 301, 386–389. doi: 10.1126/science.1083968

Christian, S. T., Harrison, R., Quayle, E., Pagel, J., and Monti, J. (1977). The
in vitro identiﬁcation of dimethyltryptamine (DMT) in mammalian brain and
its characterization as a possible endogenous neuroregulatory agent. Biochem.
Med. 18, 164–183. doi: 10.1016/0006-2944(77)90088-6

Chu, U. B., Vorperian,
N. V., Mavlyutov, T.,
indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase
N,N-dimethylaminopropyltryptamine.
doi: 10.1021/bi500175p

S. K.,
al.
et

Satyshur, K., Eickstaedt, K., Cozzi,
inhibition of
(2014). Noncompetitive
and
2956–2965.

by N,N-dimethyltryptamine

Biochemistry

53,

Chu, U., Mavlyutov, T., Schulman, A., Baker, E., Raj, R., Epstein, M., et al. (2015).
Methylation of thiols and thioethers by human indolethylamine-N methyl
transferase. FASEB J. 29:7.

Costas, J., Gratacòs, M., Escaramís, G., Martín-Santos, R., de Diego, Y., Baca-
García, E., et al. (2010). Association study of 44 candidate genes with depressive
and anxiety symptoms in post-partum women. J. Psychiatr. Res. 44, 717–724.
doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.12.012

Cozzi, N. V., Gopalakrishnan, A., Anderson, L. L., Feih, J. T., Shulgin, A. T.,
Daley, P. F., et al. (2009). Dimethyltryptamine and other hallucinogenic
tryptamines exhibit substrate behavior at the serotonin uptake transporter
and the vesicle monoamine transporter. J. Neural Transm. 116, 1591–1599.
doi: 10.1007/s00702-009-0308-8

Cozzi, N. V., Mavlyutov, T. A., Thompson, M. A., and Ruoho, A. E. (2011).
Indolethylamine N-methyltransferase expression in primate nervous tissue.
Soc. Neurosci. 37:840.19.

Dakic, V., Minardi Nascimento, J., Costa Sartore, R., Maciel R. M., Araujo,
D. B., Ribeiro, S., et al. (2017). Short
term changes in the proteome
of human cerebral organoids induced by 5-MeO-DMT. Sci. Rep. 7:12863.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-12779-5

Davies, M. A., Setola, V., Strachan, R. T., Sheﬄer, D. J., Salay, E., Hufeisen,
S. J., et al. (2006). Pharmacologic analysis of non-synonymous coding h5-
HT2A SNPs reveals alterations in atypical antipsychotic and agonist eﬃcacies.
Pharmacogenomics J. 6, 42–51. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500342

dos Santos, R. G., Bouso, J. C., and Hallak, J. E. C. (2017). Ayahuasca,
dimethyltryptamine, and psychosis: a systematic review of human studies.
10.1177/20451253166
Ther. Adv. Psychopharmacol.
89030

141–157. doi:

7,

new concepts,
doi: 10.1172/JCI30920
and

Eshleman, A. J., Forster, M. J., Wolfrum, K. M., Johnson, R. A., Janowsky, A.,
and Gatch, M. B. (2014). Behavioral and neurochemical pharmacology of
six psychoactive substituted phenethylamines: mouse locomotion, rat drug
discrimination and in vitro receptor and transporter binding and function.
Psychopharmacology 231, 875–888. doi: 10.1007/s00213-013-3303-6

Fersht, A. (1999). Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science. New York, NY:

W. H. Freeman and Company.

Fontanilla, D., Johannessen, M., Hajipour, A. R., Cozzi, N. V., Jackson, M.
B., and Ruoho, A. E. (2009). The hallucinogen N,N-dimethyltryptamine
(DMT) is an endogenous sigma-1 receptor regulator. Science 323, 934–937.
doi: 10.1126/science.1166127

Franzen, F., and Gross, H. (1965). Tryptamine, N.,N-dimethyltryptamine, N.,N-
Dimethyl-5-hydroxytryptamine and 5-methoxytryptamine in human blood
and urine. Nature 206, 1052–1052. doi: 10.1038/2061052a0

creative

Frecska, E., Móré, C. E., Vargha, A., and Luna, L. E. (2012). Enhancement
after-eﬀects of
as
J. Psychoactive Drugs 44, 191–199.

expression and entoptic phenomena

of
ceremonies.
repeated ayahuasca
doi: 10.1080/02791072.2012.703099

Frecska, E., Szabo, A., Winkelman, M. J., Luna, L. E., and McKenna, D. J. (2013).
A possibly sigma-1 receptor mediated role of dimethyltryptamine in tissue
protection, regeneration, and immunity. J. Neural Transm. 120, 1295–1303.
doi: 10.1007/s00702-013-1024-y

Frenette, P. S., and Atweh, G. F. (2007). Sickle cell disease: old discoveries,
Invest. 117, 850–858.

and future promise.

J. Clin.

S.

Short,

Frykman, P. K.,

(2012). Hirschsprung-Associated
S.
Enterocolitis: Prevention and Therapy. Semin. Pediatr. Surg. 21, 328–335.
doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2012.07.007
Gershon, M. D., and Ratcliﬀe, E. M.

(2004). Developmental biology of
the
system: pathogenesis of Hirschsprung’s disease
and other congenital dysmotilities. Semin. Pediatr. Surg. 13, 224–235.
doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2004.10.019

enteric nervous

Gillin, J. C., Kaplan, J., Stillman, R., and Wyatt, R. J. (1976). The psychedelic model
of schizophrenia: the case of N,N-dimethyltryptamine. Am. J. Psychiatry 133,
203–208. doi: 10.1176/ajp.133.2.203

Gouzoulis-Mayfrank, E., Heekeren, K., Neukirch, A., Stoll, M., Stock, C.,
Obradovic, M., et al. (2005). Psychological eﬀects of (S)-ketamine and
study in
N,N-dimethyltryptamine
healthy volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry 38, 301–311. doi: 10.1055/s-2005-
916185

(DMT): a double-blind,

cross-over

Grammenos, D., and Barker, S. A. (2015). On the transmethylation hypothesis:
stress, N,N-dimethyltryptamine, and positive symptoms of psychosis. J. Neural
Transm. 122, 733–739. doi: 10.1007/s00702-014-1329-5

Grob, C. S., McKenna, D. J., Callaway, J. C., Brito, G. S., Neves, E. S.,
Oberlaender, G., et al. (1996). Human psychopharmacology of hoasca, a plant
hallucinogen used in ritual context in Brazil. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 184, 86–94.
doi: 10.1097/00005053-199602000-00004

Harman, W. W., McKim, R. H., Mogar, R. E., Fadiman, J., and Stolaroﬀ, M. J.
(1966). Psychedelic agents in creative problem-solving: a pilot study. Psychol.
Rep. 19, 211–227. doi: 10.2466/pr0.1966.19.1.211

Hasler, W. L. (2009). Serotonin and the GI tract. Curr. Gastroenterol. Rep. 11,

383–391. doi: 10.1007/s11894-009-0058-7

Hendricks, P. S., Thorne, C. B., Clark, C. B., Coombs, D. W., and Johnson, M. W.
(2015). Classic psychedelic use is associated with reduced psychological distress
and suicidality in the United States adult population. J. Psychopharmacol. 29,
280–288. doi: 10.1177/0269881114565653
Inada, T., Nakamura, A., and Iijima, Y.

(2003). Relationship between
catechol-O-methyltransferase
treatment-resistant
schizophrenia. Am. J. Med. Genet. Part B Neuropsychiatr. Genet. 120B,
35–39. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.20023

polymorphism and

Egan, M. F., Goldberg, T. E., Kolachana, B. S., Callicott, J. H., Mazzanti, C. M.,
Straub, R. E., et al. (2001). Eﬀect of COMT Val108/158 Met genotype on
frontal lobe function and risk for schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
98, 6917–6922. doi: 10.1073/pnas.111134598

Emanuele, E., Colombo, R., Martinelli, V., Brondino, N., Marini, M., Boso, M., et al.
(2010). Elevated urine levels of bufotenine in patients with autistic spectrum
disorders and schizophrenia. Neuro Endocrinol. Lett. 31, 117–121.

Ingram, V. M. (1959). Abnormal human haemoglobins. III the chemical diﬀerence
between normal and sickle cell haemoglobins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 36,
402–411. doi: 10.1016/0006-3002(59)90183-0

Iwakoshi, N. N., Lee, A. H., Vallabhajosyula, P., Otipoby, K. L., Rajewsky, K., and
Glimcher, L. H. (2003). Plasma cell diﬀerentiation and the unfolded protein
response intersect at the transcription factor XBP-1. Nat. Immunol. 4, 321–329.
doi: 10.1038/ni907

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

14

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

Jacob, M. S., and Presti, D. E. (2005). Endogenous psychoactive tryptamines
reconsidered: an anxiolytic role for dimethyltryptamine. Med. Hypotheses 64,
930–937. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2004.11.005

Melke, J., Goubran Botros, H., Chaste, P., Betancur, C., Nygren, G., Anckarsäter,
H., et al. (2007). Abnormal melatonin synthesis in autism spectrum disorders.
Mol. Psychiatry 13, 90–98. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4002016

Johnson, M. W., Garcia-Romeu, A., Cosimano, M. P., and Griﬃths, R. R. (2014).
Pilot study of the 5-HT2AR agonist psilocybin in the treatment of tobacco
addiction. J. Psychopharmacol. 28, 983–992. doi: 10.1177/0269881114548296
Jönsson, E., Nöthen, M. M., Bunzel, R., Propping, P., and Sedvall, G. (1996). 5HT
2a receptor T102C polymorphism and schizophrenia. Lancet Lond. Engl. 347,
1831–1832.

Karg, K., Burmeister, M., Shedden, K., and Sen, S. (2011). The serotonin
transporter promoter variant (5-HTTLPR), stress, and depression meta-
analysis revisited: evidence of genetic moderation. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 68,
444–454. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.189

Kärkkäinen, J., Forsström, T., Tornaeus, J., Wähälä, K., Kiuru, P., Honkanen, A.,
et al. (2005). Potentially hallucinogenic 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor ligands
bufotenine and dimethyltryptamine in blood and tissues. Scand. J. Clin. Lab.
Invest. 65, 189–199. doi: 10.1080/00365510510013604

Keiser, M. J., Setola, V., Irwin, J. J., Laggner, C., Abbas, A. I., Hufeisen, S. J.,
et al. (2009). Predicting new molecular targets for known drugs. Nature 462,
175–181. doi: 10.1038/nature08506

Kim, J. Y., Seo, J. M., Kim, D. Y., Oh, J. T., Park, K. W., Kim, H. Y., et al. (2015).
Potential association of INMT nonsynonymous variant (His46Pro) with
Hirschsprung’s disease. Neonatology 108, 164–171. doi: 10.1159/000435874
Kuehnelt, D., Engström, K., Skröder, H., Kokarnig, S., Schlebusch, C., Kippler,
(2015). Selenium metabolism to the trimethylselenonium
M., et al.
ion (TMSe)
in the
indolethylamine N-methyltransferase gene. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 102, 1406–1415.
doi: 10.3945/ajcn.115.114157

varies markedly

polymorphisms

because

of

Kurrasch-Orbaugh, D. M., Watts, V. J., Barker, E. L., and Nichols, D. E. (2003).
Serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor-coupled phospholipase C and
phospholipase A2 signaling pathways have diﬀerent receptor reserves. J.
Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 304, 229–237. doi: 10.1124/jpet.102.042184

Kuypers, K. P., Riba, J., de la Fuente Revenga, M., Barker, S., Theunissen, E. L.,
and Ramaekers, J. G. (2016). Ayahuasca enhances creative divergent thinking
while decreasing conventional convergent thinking. Psychopharmacology 233,
3395–3403. doi: 10.1007/s00213-016-4377-8

Lataster, T., Valmaggia, L., Lardinois, M., van Os, J., and Myin-Germeys, I.
(2013). Increased stress reactivity: a mechanism speciﬁcally associated with
the positive symptoms of psychotic disorder. Psychol. Med. 43, 1389–1400.
doi: 10.1017/S0033291712002279

Limoges, E., Mottron, L., Bolduc, C., Berthiaume, C., and Godbout, R. (2005).
Atypical sleep architecture and the autism phenotype. Brain 128, 1049–1061.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awh425

Mandel,

L. R.,

and Walker, R. W.

5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine
doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(74)90120-9

(1974). The

of
in vitro. Life Sci. 15, 1457–1463.

biosynthesis

Mandell, A. J., and Morgan, M. (1971). Indole(ethyl)amine N-methyltransferase in
human brain. Nature. New Biol. 230, 85–87. doi: 10.1038/newbio230085a0
Manocha, M., and Khan, W. I. (2012). Serotonin and GI Disorders: An Update
on Clinical and Experimental Studies. Clin. Transl. Gastroenterol. 3:e13.
doi: 10.1038/ctg.2012.8

Markou, A., Kosten, T. R., and Koob, G. F. (1998). Neurobiological similarities
in depression and drug dependence:
self-medication hypothesis.
Neuropsychopharmacology 18, 135–174. doi: 10.1016/S0893-133X(97)00113-9
Mavlyutov, T. A., Epstein, M. L., Liu, P., Verbny, Y. I., Ziskind-Conhaim, L., and
Ruoho, A. E. (2012). Development of the sigma-1 receptor in C-terminals
of motoneurons and colocalization with the N,N’-dimethyltryptamine
forming enzyme,
transferase. Neuroscience 206, 60–68.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.12.040

indole-N-methyl

a

McKenna, D. J. (2004). Clinical investigations of the therapeutic potential of
ayahuasca: rationale and regulatory challenges. Pharmacol. Ther. 102, 111–129.
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2004.03.002

McKenna, D., and Riba, J. (2018). New world tryptamine hallucinogens and
the neuroscience of ayahuasca. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 36, 283–311.
doi: 10.1007/7854_2016_472

Mithoefer, M. C., Grob, C. S., and Brewerton, T. D.

(2016). Novel
psychopharmacological therapies for psychiatric disorders: psilocybin and
MDMA. Lancet Psychiatry 3, 481–488. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00576-3
Moriguchi, S., Sakagami, H., Yabuki, Y., Sasaki, Y., Izumi, H., Zhang, C.,
et al.
(2014). Stimulation of sigma-1 receptor ameliorates depressive-
like behaviors in CaMKIV null mice. Mol. Neurobiol. 52, 1210–1222.
doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8923-2

Mozier, N. M., McConnell, K. P., and Hoﬀman, J. L. (1988). S-adenosyl-
L-methionine:thioether S-methyltransferase, a new enzyme in sulfur and
selenium metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 4527–4531.

Nichols, D. E.

(2016). Psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev.

68,

264–355.

doi: 10.1124/pr.115.011478

Nichols, D. E. (2018). N,N-dimethyltryptamine and the pineal gland: separating
fact from myth. J. Psychopharmacol. 32, 30–36. doi: 10.1177/02698811177
36919

Nielsen, S. W., Ljungdalh, P. M., Nielsen, J., Nørgård, B. M., and Qvist, N. (2017).
Maternal use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy is
associated with Hirschsprung’s disease in newborns – a nationwide cohort
study. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 12:116. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0667-4

Osmond, H., and Smythies, J. (1952). Schizophrenia: a new approach. Br. J.

Psychiatry 98, 309–315. doi: 10.1192/bjp.98.411.309

Osório Fde L., Sanches, R. F., Macedo, L. R., dos Santos, R. G., Maia-de-Oliveira,
J. P., Wichert-Ana, L., et al. (2015). Antidepressant eﬀects of a single dose of
ayahuasca in patients with recurrent depression: a preliminary report. Rev.
Bras. Psiquiatr. 37, 13–20. doi: 10.1590/1516-4446-2014-1496

Ott, J. (1999). Pharmahuasca: human pharmacology of oral DMT plus harmine. J.

Psychoactive Drugs 31, 171–177. doi: 10.1080/02791072.1999.10471741

Pagan, C., Delorme, R., Callebert,

J., Goubran-Botros, H., Amsellem, F.,
Drouot, X., et al. (2014). The serotonin-N-acetylserotonin–melatonin pathway
as a biomarker for autism spectrum disorders. Transl. Psychiatry 4:e479.
doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.120

Piechota, M., Korostynski, M., Sikora, M., Golda, S., Dzbek, J., and Przewlocki,
R. (2012). Common transcriptional eﬀects in the mouse striatum following
chronic treatment with heroin and methamphetamine. Genes Brain Behav. 11,
404–414. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2012.00777.x

Räisänen, M., and Kärkkäinen, J. (1978). Quantitative assay of theN-methylated
metabolites of
tryptamine and serotonin by gas chromatography mass
spectrometry as applied to the determination of lung indoleethylamineN-
methyltransferase
596–600.
Biomed. Mass
activity.
doi: 10.1002/bms.1200051010

Spectrom.

5,

Ray, T. S. (2010). Psychedelics and the human receptorome. PLoS ONE 5:e9019.

doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009019

Riba, J., McIlhenny, E. H., Bouso, J. C., and Barker, S. A. (2015). Metabolism and
urinary disposition of N,N-dimethyltryptamine after oral and smoked
administration:
study. Drug Test. Anal. 7, 401–406.
doi: 10.1002/dta.1685

comparative

a

Riga, M. S., Soria, G., Tudela, R., Artigas, F., and Celada, P. (2014). The
natural hallucinogen 5-MeO-DMT, component of Ayahuasca, disrupts cortical
function in rats: reversal by antipsychotic drugs. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol.
17, 1269–1282. doi: 10.1017/S1461145714000261

Rodnight, R.

(1956). Separation and characterization of urinary indoles
resembling 5-hydroxytryptamine and tryptamine. Biochem. J. 64, 621–626.
doi: 10.1042/bj0640621

Rogawski, M. A., Goodrich, J. T., Gershon, M. D., and Touloukian, R. J. (1978).
Hirschsprung’s disease: absence of serotonergic neurons in the aganglionic
colon. J. Pediatr. Surg. 13, 608–615.

Roseman, L., Nutt, D. J., and Carhart-Harris, R. L. (2018). Quality of acute
psychedelic experience predicts therapeutic eﬃcacy of psilocybin for treatment-
resistant depression. Front. Pharmacol. 8:974. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00974
Saavedra, J. M., Coyle, J. T., and Axelrod, J. (1973). The distribution and properties
of the nonspeciﬁc N-methyltransferase in brain. J. Neurochem. 20, 743–752.
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.1973.tb00035.x

McKenna, D. J., and Towers, G. H. (1984). Biochemistry and pharmacology
of tryptamines and beta-carbolines. A minireview. J. Psychoactive Drugs 16,
347–358. doi: 10.1080/02791072.1984.10472305

Sabino, V., Cottone, P., Parylak, S. L., Steardo, L., and Zorrilla, E. P. (2009). Sigma-
1 receptor knockout mice display a depressive-like phenotype. Behav. Brain Res.
198, 472–476. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.11.036

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

15

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

Dean

Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase Polymorphisms

Serretti, A., and Mandelli, L. (2008). The genetics of bipolar disorder: genome “hot
regions,” genes, new potential candidates and future directions. Mol. Psychiatry
13, 742–771. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.29
Is
in enhancing human creativity?
doi: 10.1177/0269881108091597

the role of psychedelic drugs
821–827.

J. Psychopharmacol.

time to revisit

Sessa, B.

(2008).

22,

it

Shen, H. W., Jiang, X. L., Winter, J. C., and Yu, A. M. (2010). Psychedelic
5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine: metabolism, pharmacokinetics, drug
interactions, and pharmacological actions. Curr. Drug Metab. 11, 659–666.
doi: 10.2174/138920010794233495
Smith, R. L., Canton, H., Barrett, R.

Agonist properties of N,N-dimethyltryptamine
and 5-HT2C receptors. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.
doi: 10.1016/S0091-3057(98)00110-5

J., and Sanders-Bush, E.
at

(1998).
serotonin 5-HT2A
323–330.

61,

Stefanski, R., Justinova, Z., Hayashi, T., Takebayashi, M., Goldberg, S. R., and Su, T.
P. (2004). Sigma1 receptor upregulation after chronic methamphetamine self-
administration in rats: a study with yoked controls. Psychopharmacology 175,
68–75. doi: 10.1007/s00213-004-1779-9

Strassman, R. J. (1996). Human psychopharmacology of N,N-dimethyltryptamine.

Behav. Brain Res. 73, 121–124. doi: 10.1016/0166-4328(96)00081-2

Strassman, R. J., Qualls, C. R., Uhlenhuth, E. H., and Kellner, R. (1994). Dose-
response study of N,N-dimethyltryptamine in humans. II. Subjective eﬀects
and preliminary results of a new rating scale. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 51, 98–108.
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1994.03950020022002
and
opportunities.

Immunomodulation:
Immunol.

novel
6:358.

Psychedelics

(2015).
approaches
therapeutic
and
doi: 10.3389/ﬁmmu.2015.00358

Szabo,

Front.

A.

Szabo, A., Kovacs, A., Frecska, E., and Rajnavolgyi, E. (2014). Psychedelic,
N.,N-dimethyltryptamine and 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine modulate
innate and adaptive inﬂammatory responses through the Sigma-1 receptor
of human monocyte-derived dendritic
cells. PLoS ONE 9:e106533.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106533

Szabo, A., Kovacs, A., Riba, J., Djurovic, S., Rajnavolgyi, E., and Frecska, E. (2016).
The endogenous hallucinogen and trace amine, N.,N-dimethyltryptamine
(DMT) displays potent protective eﬀects against hypoxia via Sigma-1 receptor
activation in human primary iPSC-derived cortical neurons and microglia-like
immune cells. Front. Neurosci. 10:423. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00423

Takahashi, T., Takahashi, K., Ido, T., Yanai, K., Iwata, R., Ishiwata, K., et al.
(1985). 11C-labelling of
indolealkylamine alkaloids and the comparative
study of their tissue distributions. Int. J. Appl. Radiat. Isot. 36, 965–969.
doi: 10.1016/0020-708X(85)90257-1

Thompson, M. A., and Weinshilboum, R. M. (1998). Rabbit lung indolethylamine
N-methyltransferase. cDNA and gene cloning and characterization. J. Biol.
Chem. 273, 34502–34510. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.51.34502

Thompson, M. A., Moon, E., Kim, U. J., Xu, J., Siciliano, M. J., and Weinshilboum,
R. M. (1999). Human indolethylamine N-methyltransferase: cDNA cloning
and expression, gene cloning, and chromosomal localization. Genomics 61,
285–297. doi: 10.1006/geno.1999.5960

Thompson, M. A., Weinshilboum, R. M., El Yazal, J., Wood, T. C., and
Pang, Y. C. (2001). Rabbit
indolethylamine N-methyltransferase three-
dimensional structure prediction: a model approach to bridge sequence

to function in pharmacogenomic studies.
doi: 10.1007/s008940100043

J. Mol. Model. 7, 324–333.

Toma, C., Hervás, A., Balmaña, N., Salgado, M., Maristany, M., Vilella, E.,
et al. (2013). Neurotransmitter systems and neurotrophic factors in autism:
association study of 37 genes suggests involvement of DDC. World J. Biol.
Psychiatry 14, 516–527. doi: 10.3109/15622975.2011.602719

Uhlhaas, P. J., and Singer, W. (2006). Neural synchrony in brain disorders:
relevance for cognitive dysfunctions and pathophysiology. Neuron 52, 155–168.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.020

Valle, M., Maqueda, A. E., Rabella, M., Rodríguez-Pujadas, A., Antonijoan, R. M.,
Romero, S., et al. (2016). Inhibition of alpha oscillations through serotonin-
2A receptor activation underlies the visual eﬀects of ayahuasca in humans.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 26, 1161–1175. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.
03.012

Vollenweider, F. X., Vollenweider-Scherpenhuyzen, M. F., Bäbler, A., Vogel,
H., and Hell, D. (1998). Psilocybin induces schizophrenia-like psychosis
in humans via a serotonin-2 agonist action. Neuroreport 9, 3897–3902.
doi: 10.1097/00001756-199812010-00024

S., Egan, M.

Weickert, T. W., Goldberg, T. E., Mishara, A., Apud,

J. A., Kolachana,
B.
(2004). Catechol-O-methyltransferase
val108/158met genotype predicts working memory response to antipsychotic
medications. Biol. Psychiatry 56, 677–682. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.
08.012

F.,

al.

et

Wu, H., Dong, A., Zeng, H., Loppnau, P., Sundstrom, M., Arrowsmith, C. H., et al.
(2005). The Crystal Structure of Human Indolethylamine Nmethyltransferase in
Complex with SAH. Protein Data Bank Entry 2A14.

Wyatt, R. J., Saavedra, J. M., and Axelrod, J. (1973a). A dimethyltryptamine-
J. Psychiatry 130, 754–760.

forming enzyme in human blood. Am.
doi: 10.1176/ajp.130.7.754

Wyatt, R. J., Saavedra, J. M., Belmaker, R., Cohen, S., and Pollin, W. (1973b).
The dimethyltryptamine-forming enzyme in blood platelets: a study in
monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 130,
1359–1361. doi: 10.1176/ajp.130.12.1359

Yanai, K., Ido, T., Ishiwata, K., Hatazawa, J., Takahashi, T., Iwata, R., et al.
(1986). In vivo kinetics and displacement study of a carbon-11-labeled
hallucinogen, N,N-[11C]dimethyltryptamine. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. 12, 141–146.
doi: 10.1007/BF00276707

Yoshida, H., Nadanaka, S., Sato, R., and Mori, K. (2006). XBP1 is critical
to protect cells from endoplasmic reticulum stress: evidence from Site-2
protease-deﬁcient Chinese hamster ovary cells. Cell Struct. Funct. 31, 117–125.
doi: 10.1247/csf.06016

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The author declares the absence of any commercial
or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2018 Dean. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited,
in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction
is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

16

April 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 232

